HOME
PLANNING
RECIPES
INGREDIENTS
TECHNIQUES
TOOLS
SHOP
TIPS
SCHOOLS
Clam Chowder Recipes – New England or Manhattan
G. Stephen Jones • September 6, 2009 • 5 Comments

What’s Your Favorite Clam Chowder? Manhattan or New England?

Many people who come to my site are looking for “the definitive recipe for whatever it might be:brownies, yellow cake, beef stew, etc.The truth is that there are very few definitive recipes. Recipes are rarely set in stone, and chefs and home cooks around the world vary ingredients based on availability and personal taste.

While I can’t give you a definitive recipe for clam chowder, I can talk about the different types of clam chowders and give you a basic recipe for each. Don’t hesitate to play with your ingredients and add or substitute product that you enjoy.

The broad definition of “chowder” is a seafood soup or stew, usually containing potatoes. According to that definition, any soup containing clams and potatoes is technically a clam chowder. That’s not to say that there aren’t distinct types of clam chowder out there, as well as folks willing to go to blows over which type is the best.

As far as I’m concerned, “the best” is the one that you like. I have my own preference, and it might not be the same as yours, but any soup or stew with potatoes and clams is really okay in my book.

The two types of clam chowders that most people have heard of are New England and Manhattan. New England clam chowder is traditionally cream based and “white.”

Manhattan clam chowder contains chunks of tomato and is “red.”  Although the origins of both types are a bit murky, it is generally agreed that the New England style has been around longer than the Manhattan style. Regardless, as typical of chowders, both types contain seafood (clams, in this case) and potatoes.Both are fairly simply seasoned, and both are quite tasty.

Print
Clam Chowder Recipes – New England or Manhattan

Prep Time: 30 minutes

Cook Time: 30 minutes

Total Time: 1 hour

Yield: 4 servings

Related Posts
Clams Casino Recipe
Steamed Clams – Jersey Steamers
Cinnamon Coffee Cake With Chocolate Chips Recipe
Cooking Beef Tenderloin

Last modified on Thu 17 July 2014 10:34 am

Filed in: Clam/Mussels Recipes, Thickened Soup Recipes
Comments (5)

Trackback URL | Comments RSS Feed

Julia Early says:
December 10, 2017 at 5:42 pm

There is a third American chowder, Rhode Island. It is akin to New England without the cream, it’s brothy, yummy and a little lighter. http://www.finecooking.com/recipe/rhode-island-clam-chowder

Reply
G. Stephen Jones says:
December 12, 2017 at 11:00 am

Good to know. Thanks Julia.

Reply
Ismael says:
March 13, 2019 at 10:11 am

What about Rhode Island Clam Chowder? It contains no cream and no tomatoes.
Do you know if there are any other chowders besides this three?

Reply
Brian Searle says:
March 15, 2019 at 6:34 am

I’m in UK. Haven’t seen any clams over here. I love New England chowder. Could I substitute Scalops? Would that work?

Reply
G. Stephen Jones says:
March 22, 2019 at 10:52 am

Hey Brian, why not. It would be much more expensive to make and you could call it Old England chowder.

Reply
Leave a Reply

 Name ( required )

 Email ( required; will not be published )

 Website

« How Important is ACF Accreditation
Lola’s Pasta e Fagioli Recipe »
Who Is The Reluctant Gourmet?

I'm a work-at-home dad who enjoys cooking, learning everything I can about the culinary world and sharing it with you. To learn more about me... Read More

Fun Stuff
My Cooking Cartoons
Special Events
Just My Opinion
Press Releases

Follow Me!

FEATURED COOKBOOK
Featured Posts

How to Grill Your Turkey on a Gas Grill

Something Different – Grilling Your Turkey I wanted to share with you a novel way we cooked our turkey one year while we were still living in Park City, Utah. We grilled it on the barbecue. Now I’m sure many of you are saying to yourselves, “RG, get real. We’ve been grilling our bird for […]

Let’s Talk Turkey

Turkey Buying and Cooking Tips With Thanksgiving right around the corner, I thought you might enjoy talking turkey including some tips on choosing a bird and how to cook it. You would think cooking a turkey is not that big a deal but looking at all the articles in the current November issues of cooking […]

Moist Thanksgiving Turkey Tips

How To Roast A Perfectly Moist Turkey A whole turkey, perfectly cooked, juicy in thigh and breast and richly caramelized all over is a thing of beauty, but it is, indeed a rare bird. Turkeys are large, they have a big hole inside them. They are thick in some places and thinner in others. They […]

Important Links
About R.G. Jones
Advertising
Contact Me
Advertising Disclosure
Terms of Use
Copyright Info
Privacy Statement
Home About The Reluctant Gourmet Contact Me Advertising
© 2019 The Reluctant Gourmet. Theme by Solostream.


FEED ME MORE!
Skip to primary navigation
Skip to main content
Skip to primary sidebar
Skip to footer

What the Fork

Deliciously gluten-free.

Home » Gluten Free New England Clam Chowder
Gluten Free New England Clam Chowder

Jul 28, 2015 · 16 Comments

746
SHARES
Share
Tweet
Pin
Flipboard
New England Clam Chowder, a classic soup dish perfect for any time of the year. Take advantage of fresh chopped clams if they’re available to you or use canned chopped clams for ease – both delicious with superior flavor!

This is a sponsored post written by me on behalf of Hormel Foods, LLC. for IZEA. All opinions are 100% mine.

There are some foods that I associate with certain seasons that I’m sure most of you do as well. Apples and pumpkin in fall, gingerbread, cranberry and orange in the winter, asparagus in the spring and strawberries in early summer.

I also think of New England Clam Chowder when I think of summer foods. There’s something about fresh seafood that just makes me feel like summer has finally arrived.

As a New Englander, we have access to amazing fresh fish year round. But it’s during the summer when all fish shacks open up and serve “the best” clam chowder, fish and chips, fish sandwiches, lobster rolls, and fisherman’s platters. It’s all spectacular and none of it is gluten free.

We’ve really been missing hitting up our favorite fresh seafood place directly on the docks so I’ve started making it at home and it’s just as good, if not better. I’ve actually been making this clam chowder recipe for years and have tweaked it to meet our tastes perfectly.

People have different opinions when it comes to chowder and what it should be. Fact: Manhattan is red, Rhode Island is clear and New England is white. Opinion: New England Clam Chowder is, hands down, the best kind you could ever have. It’s thick, creamy, full of wonderful clam flavor and oh so delicious. Some like it thicker than others but as long as its creamy and chock full of clams, it’s gonna be great. I actually make mine a different thickness depending on what I’m serving it in. I’ll make it thicker if serving it in a bread bowl and not quite as thick if I’m having it in a regular old bowl.

One important part of making my easy clam chowder recipe (other than the clams) is the base of the soup – the broth is the backbone of the soup. I heat potatoes that I use in the soup in chicken broth made with HERB-OX® chicken bouillon, which is then used in the soup itself. I’ve tried several different kinds of broth over the years and HERB-OX® lends the best flavor without overtaking the flavor of the clams. Not only is the flavor spot-on, it’s super affordable – you’ll get a lot of uses out of it!

Salt pork is also a must. I like to get the sliced salt pork. The fat rendering from the salt pork brings so much flavor and is the fat base that mixes with the flour to thicken the soup. Don’t skip it if you don’t have to. If you can’t find it, you can sub in a few slices of bacon but I HIGHLY recommend using the salt pork.

In this recipe, I used fresh chopped clams that I got in the seafood department at my local grocery store. If fresh chopped clams are not available to you, don’t despair! I’ve also made this many times with chopped canned clams and it works just as well. I find those and the bottled clam juice in the aisle with the tuna fish – they’re pretty much available anywhere.

Soup is such an easy and comforting meal any night of the week, any time of the year. But please give my little heart some peace of mind and satisfaction and promise me you will make the best clam chowder recipe this summer. Enjoy!

be sure to follow me on instagram and hashtag #whattheforkfoodblog or tag @whattheforkfoodblog – i love seeing what you make!
if you love this gluten free new england clam chowder recipe, be sure to follow me on social media so you never miss a post:
| facebook | twitter | pinterest | instagram | youtube |

New England Clam Chowder
yield: SERVES 4-6prep time: 20 MINUTEScook time: 30 MINUTEStotal time: 50 MINUTES

New England Clam Chowder, a classic soup dish perfect for any time of the year. Take advantage of fresh chopped clams if they’re available to you or use canned chopped clams for ease – both delicious with superior flavor!

PRINT

© Sharon Lachendro - What The Fork Food Blog
CUISINE: American / CATEGORY: Main
OTHER CHOWDER RECIPES YOU’LL ENJOY:

Roasted Carrot Soup – The Wicked Noodle

Slow Cooker Potato Leek Soup – Faithfully Gluten Free

Simple Summer Corn Soup – Minimalist Baker

Gluten Free Ham Cheddar Chowder – My Gluten-Free Kitchen

 

+ More, Gluten-Free
chowder, clam chowder, New England Clam Chowder

MORE RECIPES TO TRY
Braised Italian Meatballs and Le Creuset Giveaway
Gluten Free Edible Chocolate Chip Cookie Dough
Gluten Free Cake Batter Rice Krispie Treats
Reader Interactions
Comments

SUBSCRIBE
We won't send you spam. Unsubscribe at any time.
Footer
Be a Gluten Free Baking Rockstar

Get the #1 TIP and a FREE printable!

GET THE FREEBIE!

We won't send you spam. Unsubscribe at any time.

COPYRIGHT © 2019 · CRAVINGS PRO



America's most trusted culinary resource since 1997
Search for:










Home
Recipe Indexes
Food History
Cooking Articles
Culinary Dictionary Index
West Coast Clam Chowder Recipe
Recipe
Comments
Print
Pin
4K
Share
72
Tweet
Yum
Email
West Coast Clam Chowder

For our family, Grandma’s clam chowder is traditional to serve on Christmas Eve every year.  My grandchildren insist that it be served.  One year I decided to change up the tradition by serving ham instead, and I had my own children and grandchildren protesting.  I learned my lesson after that!

 

 

This Pacific Northwest clam chowder recipe has been passed down through the generations in my family.  My Grandma Myers taught me to make this clam chowder recipe when I was a young girl.   Part of the secret to the wonderful flavor is adding bacon to the chowder.  After the bacon grease is drained from the pot, there is just a little of the bacon grease still lingering when the onions are sauteed.  This adds an extra special flavoring in my humble opinion.

A true Clam Chowder recipe is a matter of debate between New Englanders and those further down the coast.  New Englanders say that milk must be used, while New Yorkers and Philadelphians maintain just as stoutly that a chowder is not a chowder unless the stock is made from fish and contains tomatoes.  In other parts of the country, the subject is academic, and both are acceptable. This recipe is made in more of a West Coast  style which is more like a bisque and not quite as thick as a traditional New England chowder.

Learn about the History of Chowder.

 

Print
West Coast Clam Chowder Recipe:
Prep Time
20 mins
Cook Time
30 mins
Total Time
50 mins
 

Related Recipes
Zucchini Corn Clam Chowder Soup Recipe
History of Chowder
West Coast Clam Chowder History

Categories:

Christmas    Clam Stews, Soups and Chowders    Heirloom Recipes    Pacific Northwest   
Comments and Reviews
2 Responses to “West Coast Clam Chowder Recipe”
Dorothy J
November 25, 2018

Great recipe, husband enjoyed and the only thing I did different was add a bit of dill.

Reply
Victor
December 5, 2018

Good

Reply
Leave a Reply

Name (required)
Email (will not be published) (required)
Website
Comment

Sign Up for our Newsletter

Email Address *






Seasonal Recipes
Pizza and Pizza Dough Recipe Collection
Homemade Cracker Jacks Recipe




Newest Recipes
Cheese Straws Recipe
Appalachian Soup Beans Recipe and History
Most Viewed Recipes
Perfect Prime Rib Roast Recipe – Cooking Instructions
Perfect Boneless Leg of Lamb Roast Recipe




 

What’s Cooking America is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for sites to earn advertising fees by advertising and linking to products which are identified on this web site with green text.

 

 

 




What’s Cooking America ©2004-2019 by Linda Stradley What’s Cooking America Privacy Policy and Disclosures










Sign Up for our Newsletter

Email Address *





Hallmark
Hallmark eCards
Hallmark Business Connections
Hallmark Channel
Hallmark Movies and Mysteries
Hallmark Movies Now
SCHEDULE
MOVIES
CHRISTMAS
HOME & FAMILY
CHANNEL LOCATOR
Weekdays 10am/9c
SHOWTIMES
HOME VIDEO EPISODE GUIDE RECIPES HOW-TO FULL EPISODES MEDICARE INSIGHTS BIOS ...
SHARE
SUMMER CLAM CHOWDER
Chef Ron Duprat shares his recipe for a hearty and delicious summer clam chowder.
SHARE

Serves 8-10


Get more from the Episode >>

THE LATEST RECIPES
Carrot Spice Cookies & Almond Buttercream Frosting
Homemade Tots With Spicy Cheese Sauce
Eggplant Pasta “Tambourine” With Burrata (“Tamburello Di Melananzane”)
Prime Rib With Yorkshire Pudding
Ricotta Gnudi
Layered Peppermint Party Pudding

Hallmark Movies & Mysteries Hallmark Drama Hallmark Movies Now About Us Careers FAQ Advertising International Corporate Press Channel Locator Newsletter Privacy Policy Terms of Use Hallmark Cards Games Royal Court Survey Accessibility
Copyright © 2019 Crown Media, all rights reserved

Skip to content
 Menu
Log In Subscribe
 Search
Travel
LOCAL BIZ/TECH SPORTS ENTERTAINMENT LIFE TRAVEL HOMES OPINION | JOBS AUTOS EXPLORE
Outdoors Northwest Hikes Travel Wise Washington Oregon B.C. Hawaii
All Sections
Food & DrinkLifeTravel
A best-ever clam chowder recipe from a favorite Seattle chef
Originally published December 6, 2018 at 7:00 am Updated December 6, 2018 at 4:25 pm
If you’re going razor clamming, the Tokeland Hotel makes a fine home base — and chef Heather Earnhardt also makes a best-ever chowder. (Bethany Jean Clement / The Seattle Times)

Chef Heather Earnhardt's super-creamy clam-chowder recipe is one of the best, whether it's made with the Pacific Northwest delicacy known as razor clams or whatever kind you have on hand.

Share story
By Bethany Jean Clement
Seattle Times food writer

Chef Heather Earnhardt of Seattle’s beloved The Wandering Goose now has a lovely coastal headquarters at the Tokeland Hotel — opened in 1885, it’s Washington state’s oldest lodgings. The super-creamy, slightly spicy chowder she makes at the restaurant there calls for the Pacific Northwest delicacy known as razor clams, and the Tokeland makes a fine home base if you’re heading out to dig your own. (The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife has all the info, from dates for digs to how to clean them.)

The best way to eat razor clams, as everyone including Earnhardt agrees, is right away, just cleaned, dredged lightly in flour and fried in butter. But razor-clam chowder is a special treat, the delicate clams lending a bouncy texture and a perfectly light oceanic flavor. Earnhardt’s recipe — which she’ll include in a new Tokeland Hotel cookbook when she finds the time to put it together — starts, propitiously, with frying bacon in a half-stick of butter. The celery and shallot get cooked only briefly, maintaining a little crunchy life in the chowder. Don’t chop the clams too fine; you don’t want them to get lost.

Read more about chef Heather Earnhardt and the Tokeland Hotel

If you can’t go dig your own razor clams (or go eat chowder at the Tokeland Hotel), you can get them frozen from Alaska at Pike Place Fish Market (where they throw the fish), both on-site and online; Uwajimaya stocks frozen ones, too. This chowder would also be very fine made with regular Manila clams. Serve it with crackers or bread, with an extra pat of butter melting on top of each bowl.

Most Read Life Stories
At long last! Georgetown Brewing opens its tasting room, and Aslan Brewing comes to Seattle
Why it’s time to stop the negative self-talk surrounding diet and nutrition
This roast chicken recipe with paprika, parsley and parmesan deserves your attention
From the star of Food Network’s ‘Iron Chef,’ new Momosan fails to win over Seattle Times restaurant critics
Travel Troubleshooter | Expedia guarantees a price match on hotel rooms then reneges on their promise. What gives?

Earnhardt says this version “tastes how you always hoped clam chowder would taste.”


Bethany Jean Clement: bclement@seattletimes.com; on Twitter: @BJeanClement.
Recommended in
Travel Troubleshooter | When American Airlines cancels a flight, are…
How to avoid crowds in Italy’s iconic Cinque Terre
Alaska Airlines’ quirky Hawaii sale links big waves to cheaper airfares
Meander through the Danube’s big three: Vienna, Bratislava and…
Around the Web
From Neah Bay to Key West: The story behind one man’s 4,764-mile cross-country cycling…
Seattle Times - Travel
A short walk through Ireland’s long history
Seattle Times - Travel
The Great American RV Trip: Four families, 2,000 miles, and a national parks adventure…
Seattle Times - Travel
Contact

About the company

Advertise

Subscriber Services
 Today’s Front Page Facebook Twitter
RSS Feeds Newsletters Mobile Apps Subscribe
Copyright © 2019 The Seattle Times | Privacy statement | Terms of service
We noticed you're blocking ads.

Great journalism depends on ad revenue. To keep reading, please turn off your ad blocker, create an account or support us by becoming a subscriber.

Log in to continue reading

Unblock ads
Subscribe

or create an account

If you feel you've received this message in error, please contact us online.

The Daring Gourmet

Grappling Each Dish By The Horns

Sign up for our newsletter!
no spam. ever.
Check out our privacy policy
Home

About

Recipes

Home & Garden

Travel

Health

Work With Me

Contact

Shop

Home » BEST New England Clam Chowder

BEST New England Clam Chowder

This post contains affiliate links.
966
SHARES
Share
Tweet
Pin
Email
 Jump to Recipe  Jump to Video  Print Recipe

One of America’s most famous dishes, get ready to enjoy a bowl of pure comfort!  This New England Clam Chowder recipe gets bumped up several flavor notches and will have you coming back for seconds!

The concept of chowder goes back several centuries.  Chowders were introduced to the United States during its early years of settlement and the oldest published recipe we know about, for fish chowder, was printed in 1751.  What we call New England Clam Chowder today was the earliest and most popular variety of clam chowder (known as Boston Clam Chowder in the Midwest) and it was a contribution of French and British settlers.  By the 18th century it was a household staple and has remained one of New England’s most famous and beloved dishes.

Today, New England Clam Chowder is still served at Ye Olde Union Oyster House in Boston, the nation’s oldest continuously operating restaurant, where it has been on the menu since 1836.

Variations of New England clam chowder exist throughout the region and, depending on where you are, the consistency can be thin or thick.  Additionally, although it is generally regarded a cardinal sin to add tomatoes, there are some who insist on adding just enough to turn the color a pretty pink.  In 1939, the state legislature of Maine decided it had had enough of this sacrilege and tried passing a bill that would make the inclusion of tomatoes in clam chowder illegal.  It didn’t pass.

Notwithstanding some debated variations, what distinguishes New England clam chowder is the absence of tomatoes and the inclusion of milk or cream, potatoes, onion and clams, and its common accompaniment of oyster crackers that are either crushed and added to the soup as a thickener or sprinkled on top.

In the words of American novelist Joseph C. Lincoln:

A New England clam chowder, made as it should be, is a dish to preach about, to chant praises and sing hymns and burn incense before. To fight for. The Battle of Bunker Hill was fought for–or on–clam chowder; part of it at least, I am sure it was.  It is as American as the Stars and Stripes, as patriotic as the national Anthem. It is ‘Yankee Doodle in a kettle.’

An excellent New England Clam Chowder uses few and simple ingredients but the quality of these ingredients is key.  Use the freshest produce, the best cream.  Salt pork was traditionally used but in more recent decades it has been replaced by bacon.  The smokiness of bacon can tend to overpower the delicate flavors of the clam chowder and for that reason I recommend Italian pancetta.  Unlike bacon pancetta it is dry-cured, not smoked, and contributes an incredible, complex flavor that is complementary instead of overpowering.

Using quality ingredients also means using the finest fish broth, something that was used in many of the earliest known clam chowder recipes.  Set the clam juice aside and instead reach for fish broth which will give your chowder a much richer and satisfying flavor.

For the finest fish stock I’m using my favorite brand, Aneto.  They not only make the world’s BEST paella cooking bases (check out their Valencian paella and seafood paella cooking bases), they also make the best broths in my opinion.  Based in Barcelona, Spain, Aneto’s premium broths are made the same way you would make them in your own kitchen:  The freshest seafood and vegetables are added to large pots and slow simmered for hours before the broth poured into cartons for selling.  The ingredients include Monkfish, Cod, Tomato, Onion, Carrot, Fennel, Leek, Celery, Virgin Olive Oil, Garlic and Sea Salt.  Nothing else.  No concentrates, powders, artificial ingredients, GMO’s, fillers or flavor enhancers of any kind.  Just pure, whole, real ingredients.  We highly recommend it.

I also love to use Aneto’s fish broth in a variety of pho and Asian soups and also for making a quick and easy seafood bouillabaisse!

Aneto’s 100% Natural Premium Fish Broth can be purchased here on Amazon or in select stores across the nation.  Note, the broths are significantly cheaper on Amazon if you buy them in bulk (6-pack).  Individually they’re cheaper in stores (check the store locator for your nearest location).

We had the opportunity to tour their factory from top to bottom, watch the broth-making process from start to finish, and were absolutely blown away by the beauty and simplicity of how they create their broths.  In the world of broth manufacturers, Aneto is truly unique and their broth-making process is one of the most encouraging and inspiring things I’ve witnessed.  Come read about it and  take our virtual tour of the world’s most remarkable broth manufacturer.

If you’re a fan of New England Clam Chowder then you know from experience that too often they’re either ultra thick and gloppy or the binding between the fat and carbs has broken and you end up with a watery soup with oil droplets all over in it.

Not so with this recipe.  This New England Clam Chowder tackles those problems and the result is a perfectly silky-smooth and creamy texture with wonderfully balanced flavors that will make you sigh with comfort.

Let’s get started!

Slice the pancetta (or bacon if using) into thin strips.  Fry in a medium stock pot until crispy then remove with a slotted spoon, leaving about a tablespoon of the grease in the pot.

Add the butter to the pot along with the onions, celery and garlic.  Cook for 6-8 minutes until softened but not browned.  Add the flour, stir to combine and cook for a minute.

Add the broth and white wine, stirring to prevent the flour from clumping, and bring to a simmer, stirring constantly.  Add the potatoes, thyme, bay leaves, salt, pepper and half of the pancetta.

Simmer the chowder for 20-25 minutes until the potatoes are extremely tender.  Discard the bay leaves.

The consistency is right when the potatoes are so soft that some have begun to fall apart.  If you prefer the chowder to be thicker or less chunky, use an immersion blender (or transfer 1 cup of the chowder to a blender) puree just a small portion of it.

Add the clams, cream and parsley and heat through for another 5 minutes.  Add salt and pepper to taste, and serve immediately.

Serve sprinkled with the remaining pancetta, fresh parsley and oyster crackers.

Enjoy!

Enter to win these FOUR 33.8 ounce cartons of premium broths from Aneto!  These include Aneto’s premium 100% All-Natural Chicken Broth, Fish Broth, Valencian Paella Cooking Base and Seafood Paella Cooking Base.

Enter by leaving a comment below answering the question, “Why would you like to try Aneto’s broths and which one are you most interested in trying?”  The winner will be notified via email and has 48 hours to respond.  This giveaway is for U.S. residents.  Giveaway ends March 9, 2018.

THIS GIVEAWAY HAS ENDED.  Congratulations to our winner, Jackie!

 

Pin Me!

 

 Print Recipe
4.81 from 52 votes
Ultimate New England Clam Chowder

Video
Calories: 390kcal | Carbohydrates: 30g | Protein: 8g | Fat: 26g | Saturated Fat: 14g | Cholesterol: 76mg | Sodium: 785mg | Potassium: 869mg | Fiber: 5g | Sugar: 1g | Vitamin A: 950IU | Vitamin C: 25.7mg | Calcium: 94mg | Iron: 6.2mg

 

Restaurant sign cropped and used courtesy of Sayamindu Dasgupta via CC licensing

966
SHARES
Share
Tweet
Pin
Email

filed under: affiliate, america, by country or region, by course, by ingredient, by type of dish, disclosure, food, giveaways, main dishes, north america, seafood, soups & stews tagged with: american, aneto, bacon, chowder, clams, creamy, fish broth, new england clam chowder, potatoes, seafood, soup

« Sega Wat (Spicy Ethiopian Beef Stew)
The 1912 Modern Farmhouse Kitchen Remodel: The Reveal »
118 Responses

A. DeJ

23 April, 2019 at 2:35 pm

I think responders should actually make/taste the chowder before rating it. How can you possibly give a dish 4 or 5 stars just because “it looks delicious”. I’m from New England so I will definitely try this recipe… then after making/tasting I’ll rate it accordingly. Thanks. Apologies if you think I’m being rude.

Reply

Mollie McAuliffe

28 April, 2019 at 10:09 am

agreed. thinking something you’ve read sounds delicious and actually making the recipe and experiencing how it really tastes are completely different. enthusiasm and kudos are great – but tell me what you experienced!

Reply

HERB SEARS

7 October, 2019 at 8:12 am

Can one substitute the wine for bailys irish cream creamer ( non alcohol) thankyou

Reply

Anonymous

7 November, 2019 at 6:29 pm

NO. Not at all the same. Just don’t use wine or use a dot of vinegar.

Reply
« Older Comments
Add your Response

Your email address will not be published.

Recipe Rating

Comment

Name

Email

Website

 Receive Email Notifications?
no, do not subscribe
yes, replies to my comment
yes, all comments/replies
instantly
hourly digest
daily digest
weekly digest
Or, you can subscribe without commenting.

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.


Welcome!  I’m Kimberly and I share delicious originals, revitalized classics and authentic dishes from around the world.  Come travel the world through your taste buds!

 


Sign up for our newsletter!

Receive the latest from The Daring Gourmet!

no spam. ever.
Check out our privacy policy
COPYRIGHT

Unless otherwise stated, all images, content and recipes are original and are the sole property of Kimberly Killebrew, daringgourmet.com. No photographs or other content may be used without prior written consent.

About Request Contact Privacy

Copyright © 2013–2019All Rights Reserved

Copyright © 2019 · Daring Gourmet On Genesis Framework · WordPress · Log in

Home
About
Recipes
Home & Garden
Travel
Health
Work With Me
Contact
Shop

Skip to content
Mobile Menu
Search

Spend With Pennies

Home
Recipes
Recipe Index (Search)
View ALL Recipes
Appetizers & Snacks
Beverages
Main Dishes
Casseroles
Beef
Chicken
Pasta and Pizza
Pork
Seafood
Side Dishes
Soups & Stews
Salads
Dessert
Healthy Recipes
Dips and Dressings
Slow Cooker
Breakfast
Videos
Shop
eBooks
Kitchen Favorites
Kitchen Tips
Holidays
Thanksgiving
Christmas
Valentine’s Day
St. Patricks Day
Easter
Halloween

Subscribe for daily recipes

Sign up now

Home > Recipes > Dessert > Apple Pie Recipe

DESSERT

Apple Pie Recipe
by
HOLLY
5 from 5 votes
November 8, 2019 · 21 Comments
Pin Recipe
Jump to Recipe

This post may contain affiliate links. Please read my disclosure policy.

This Apple Pie Recipe combines the sweet and tender flavors of baked apples with a deliciously flaky pie crust. 

This recipe is a favorite all year long and great for the holidays serve along with a perfect pumpkin pie and a classic pecan pie!

Apple pie has inspired so many of my recipes like apple pie roll ups, apple pie bread and apple pie cupcakes. Now it’s time to give you guys the perfect classic apple pie recipe. 

What Kind of Apples for Apple Pie?

With an apple pie recipe, you want apples that are tart, sweet, and firm. You want the apples to be strong enough not to break down completely while you bake the apple pie, but light enough that they are soft when they bake. Below are our favorite apples to use in apple pie!

Granny Smith – Tart, green, flavorful, and perfect for apple pie
Golden Delicious – Softer, sweet, and yellow in color
Northern Spy – Red and green, honey notes, and on the sweet side
Idared – Red in color, not too harsh in flavor, on the tart side
How To Make Apple Pie

To make a classic apple pie recipe, begin with a double pie crust.

Rolling Pie Crust: If you made homemade crust, roll it to ⅛” thickness (I roll them bottom out to about 12″ circles) and line a 9″ pie plate. Set aside.

How to Make Apple Pie Filling

Prep Apples

To make apple pie filling, thinly slice, core and peel apples. I slice them between 1/4″-1/8″ thick thinner slices soften more.
Apple peels tend to get chewy when cooked it’s always best to peel the apples first.
Toss all of the apple pie ingredients together. In this apple pie filling, the addition of a bit of flour helps to absorb the liquids that the apples release when they bake.

Unlike strawberry rhubarb pie or blueberry pie, you don’t need to worry about adding tapioca other thickening ingredients as apples don’t release a ton of juices like a berry does. Turn the apple pie filling into the pie crust.

If you are making a lattice pie crust, now is your time to shine!  If you are just using a flat piece of pie dough as a topping, roll it out to ⅛” thickness and place it over the apple pie. Crimp and trim the edges, and slice some slits into the crust to allow steam to escape while the apple pie cooks. 

How Long to Bake Apple Pie

Start the apple pie at a higher temperature to keep the crust from getting soggy. Depending on your apples, the pie can sometimes bubble over so I always place it on a pan lined with parchment to save my oven any mess.

Bake apple pie at 425°F for 15 minutes and then reduce the heat to 375 for an additional 35-40 minutes or until the apples are tender and the pie crust is golden.

If the outer crust starts to brown too much, cover the edges with foil or a pie crust shield.

Does Apple Pie Need to be Refrigerated?

Allow the apple pie to cool slightly before serving. This also ensure you won’t end up with a liquidy pie. Serve it warm with ice cream and enjoy!

Leftovers can be stored in the refrigerator or on the counter for up to 2 days.

5 from 5 votes
Review Recipe
Apple Pie recipe
PREP TIME 30 minutes
COOK TIME 1 hour
TOTAL TIME 1 hour 30 minutes
SERVINGS 8 servings
AUTHOR Holly Nilsson
COURSE Dessert, Pie
CUISINE American
 A classic apple pie recipe with tender apples in a flaky crust.
 Print
Pin

Follow Spend with Pennies on Pinterest

KEYWORD apple pie, apple pie recipe, easy, homemade
© SpendWithPennies.com. Content and photographs are copyright protected. Sharing of this recipe is both encouraged and appreciated. Copying and/or pasting full recipes to any social media is strictly prohibited. Please view my photo use policy here.
More Apple Recipes You’ll Love
Apple Crisp – Quick and easy!
Baked Apples
Homemade Apple Butter – Perfect on muffins or pancakes.
The Best Apple Crumb Pie Ever
Easy Apple Cake – So moist with a cream cheese filling!

 

CATEGORIES

Dessert

More Recipes You'll Love

RECIPES

MUST Try Apple Pie Inspired Recipes!

DESSERT

Apple Cheesecake Pie
TOTAL 1 hr 20 mins

DESSERT

The Best Apple Crumb Pie Ever!
TOTAL 1 hr 10 mins

DESSERT

Apple Pie Dumplings with just 2 Ingredients! (Apple Pie Filling)
TOTAL 29 mins

DESSERT

Apple Pie Bites
TOTAL 30 mins

DESSERT

Baked Apple Pie Roll Ups (video)
TOTAL 25 mins
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Holly


pinterest

facebook

twitter
instagram

Holly is a wine and cheese lover, recipe creator, shopping enthusiast and self appointed foodie. Her greatest passion is creating in the kitchen and making deliciously comforting recipes for the everyday home cook!

More Posts by Holly

GET A FREE BONUS EBOOK!
Subscribe Now

Subscribe to recieve weekly recipes and get a FREE Bonus e-book: Quick & Easy Weeknight Meals!

Email *
GDPR Agreement *
Yes! Send me the latest recipes via email. *
Go

You can unsubscribe anytime by clicking the “unsubscribe” link at the bottom of emails you receive.

Latest & Greatest Dishes

DESSERT

Apple Dumplings
TOTAL 1 hr 5 mins

PASTA AND PIZZA

Orecchiette with Brussels Sprouts
TOTAL 35 mins

SOUPS & STEWS

Creamy Potato Soup
TOTAL 50 mins

APPETIZERS & SNACKS

Easy Crostini
TOTAL 16 mins

SALADS

Chicken Fajita Salad
TOTAL 45 mins

PASTA AND PIZZA

Taco Stuffed Pasta Shells
TOTAL 1 hr

Hi there, I’m Holly!

I am a wine and cheese lover, recipe creator, shopping enthusiast and self-appointed foodie. My greatest passion is creating in the kitchen and making deliciously comforting recipes!

More About Me

Search for
Submit

rss
twitter
facebook
pinterest
instagram
snapchat
youtube

FIND THE PERFECT RECIPE
Search for Recipes Here

Home cooked Meals for every occasion. From quick and easy weeknight meals, so turkey dinner!

Search Here

As Seen On:
Get Delicious New Recipes Daily
Email *
GDPR Agreement *
Yes! Send me the latest recipes via email. *
Go

You can unsubscribe anytime by clicking the “unsubscribe” link at the bottom of emails you receive.

HomeAbout MeContact UsDisclosure/Privacy PolicyFAQ

© 2019 Spend with Pennies

Back to Top
Spend With Pennies
Home
Recipes
Videos
Shop
Kitchen Tips
Holidays
About
Contact

rss
twitter
facebook
pinterest
instagram
snapchat
youtube

Search for
Submit

Allow anonymous data tracking

Skip to main content
King Arthur Flour
SHOP
RECIPES
LEARN
ABOUT
BLOG
Secondary navigation
SIGN IN
View your cart
Subnav: Recipes
CATEGORIES
COLLECTIONS
RESOURCES
RECIPES  PIE  FRUIT PIES
Apple Pie
114 REVIEWS
4.7 out of 5 stars
SHARES
23.9k
Share on Facebook
Share by Email
Share on Pinterest
Share on Twitter

Apple pie: American icon, most popular pie, and the ONE dessert everyone has to make for Thanksgiving. With its flaky, buttery crust; tart-sweet apples, and wonderful cinnamon-y aroma, a slice of warm apple pie is the perfect end to any repast, from casual lunch to elegant dinner. Add vanilla bean ice cream, and you’ve got a dessert for the ages.

PREP
45 mins
BAKE
55 mins to 1 hr 5 mins
TOTAL
2 hrs
YIELD
One 9" pie, 8 servings
SAVE RECIPE
PRINT
Ingredients

NUTRITION INFORMATION
Instructions

Perfect your technique
BLOG
Apple Pie Bakealong

BY PJ HAMEL


Tips from our Bakers
For the best apple flavor, use more than one variety of apple in your filling. Use apples that will hold their shape during baking: Jonagold, Granny Smith, Ginger Gold, Cameo, Northern Spy, and Delicious are some good choices.
For a simple sugar-crumb crust in place of a pastry top crust, work together 1/2 cup each sugar, unbleached all-purpose flour, and butter (8 tablespoons), plus a pinch of salt, until sandy textured. Sprinkle atop the pie in place of the top crust; save the remaining top-crust pastry for another single-crust pie.

Want to top your apple pie with an ingenious (and delicious!) cinnamon bun crust? See our blog post, Cinnamon Bun Apple Pie.

There are many different thickening options available for fruit pies, from flour to cornstarch to Instant ClearJel and more. For an easy guide to thickener substitutions, see our Pie Filling Thickeners Guide.
SHARES
23.9k
Share on Facebook
Share by Email
Share on Pinterest
Share on Twitter
Baker’s Resources
RECIPE SUCCESS GUIDE
TIPS & TECHNIQUES
HIGH-ALTITUDE BAKING
BAKER’S YEAST
INGREDIENT WEIGHT CHART
TOOLS & PANS
HOW TO MEASURE FLOUR
SAFE HANDLING INSTRUCTIONS
CHAT WITH A BAKER
For more recipes like this subscribe to our newsletter

RECIPES
Recommended Recipes
FRUIT PIES
Apple Pie with Cranberries
FRUIT PIES
Crusty Apple Pie
FRUIT PIES
Cherry Pie
FRUIT PIES
Apple Pan Dowdy
SHOP
Related Products
Red Deep Dish Pie Pan - 9"
4 OUT OF 5 STARS 3 REVIEWS
Boiled Cider - 1 Pint
4.9 OUT OF 5 STARS 542 REVIEWS
Instant ClearJel - 8 oz.
4.5 OUT OF 5 STARS 270 REVIEWS
Vietnamese Cinnamon - 3 oz.
4.9 OUT OF 5 STARS 1026 REVIEWS
4.7
4.7 star rating
114 Reviews, 1 Q&As
WRITE A REVIEW ASK A QUESTION
Reviews
Questions
Filter Reviews
Free text search
Recipe Ingredients Results Cider Sugar Juice
Lemon Instructions Texture Cinnamon Flavor ...
RATING
RECOMMEND
114 Reviews
SORT: SELECT
J
Judy L.
Verified Reviewer
5 star rating
Recommend:
Yes
11/11/19
First time out and SUCCESS!
I was hesitant to do this because my Mother in law always made the best pies. I knew I couldn't touch hers so I never tried. Boiled Cider who would have thought of that! WOW! was it ever a success and my husband and son loved it.
Location:
Johnson City, Tennessee
 Share
' Share Review by Judy L. on 11 Nov 2019
Was This Review Helpful?  0  0
A
anotherSusan
Verified Reviewer
5 star rating
Recommend:
Yes
10/30/19
Who knew I needed a recipe?
I have made apple pies year after year after year. I would make a filling of apples with a bit of lemon juice, sugar and cinnamon and bake it. Some friends brought me some a selection apples from the Shelburne Farms in Stow MA and I decided I should try something different. This recipe to be exact. I have had that boiled cider on the pantry shelf....Read More
Location:
Somerville, MA
 Share
' Share Review by anotherSusan on 30 Oct 2019
Was This Review Helpful?  1  0
S
Stephenie
Verified Reviewer
5 star rating
Recommend:
Yes
10/25/19
Novice baker here, this is great!!
I have never attempted a pie before I I tried this. I actually did not know what boiled cider was and I ended up making it myself and it turned out amazingly well!
Location:
Plainfield Illinois
 Share
' Share Review by Stephenie on 25 Oct 2019
Was This Review Helpful?  2  0
K
Kathy K.
Verified Reviewer
5 star rating
Recommend:
Yes
10/15/19
Kathy
Scrumptious and the most reminiscent of the apple pie I remember my mom made from scratch. I don't recall her ever using a recipe, however the deliciousness was consistent as was the texture. When I came across this recipe then made the pie I was not disappointed and it took me back in time. I used mostly Honey Crisp with a couple of Granny Smith ...Read More
Location:
Baldwinsville NY
 Share
' Share Review by Kathy K. on 15 Oct 2019
Was This Review Helpful?  1  0
P
Piegrl
Verified Reviewer
5 star rating
Recommend:
Yes
10/14/19
Piegrl
I made the recipe as written I was a little hesitant because I had never tried boiled apple cider which I purchased from KA the reason is because I don’t like Apple cider but the boiled cider is the bomb 💣 it brings the apple 🍎 pie 🥧 to another level so glad I tried it
Location:
Lockport Illinois
 Share
' Share Review by Piegrl on 14 Oct 2019
Was This Review Helpful?  2  0
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Connect with us
Receive Recipes & Special Offers

Our Social Communities

Facebook

Instagram

Pinterest

Twitter

YouTube

Get in Touch

CHAT | EMAIL

The Bakers Catalogue
Shop Online
Quick Shop
Order Tracking
Baker's Rewards Plus
Current Promotions
Request a Catalogue
Wholesale Opportunities
For Home Bakers
Recipes
Baking Guides
Baker's Hotline
Classes for Home Bakers
Baking Contests
Sift Magazine
Our Cookbooks
For Professional Bakers
Bakery & Food Service Sales
Commercial Product Lines
Wholesale Distributors
Classes & Training
Bakery Formulas
Resources & Reference
King Arthur Flour
Our Product Lines
Find Products Near You
Say No to Raw Dough
Visit Us
Jobs & Careers
News and Press
Contact Us

Copyright © 2019 King Arthur Flour Company, Inc. All rights reserved.


Footer - Legal
Supply Chain Disclosure Accessibility Privacy Policy Terms of Use
SEARCH

This site uses cookies to provide you with the best experience possible.

 Learn More Close

THE WHOLESOME DISH

Easy Recipes for Busy Families

ALL RECIPES
CHICKEN RECIPES
GROUND BEEF RECIPES
EASY DINNERS
BREAKFAST
ABOUT
CONTACT

Home » Easy Dinners » The Best Classic Burger

THE BEST CLASSIC BURGER

May 1, 2019

PINTEREST

FACEBOOK

EMAIL
 Jump to Recipe  Jump to Video  Print Recipe

The Best Classic Burger Recipe – Perfectly seasoned juicy homemade hamburgers.  This easy recipe only needs a few ingredients.

HOW DO YOU MAKE A GREAT BURGER?

I’m a firm believer that a truly great hamburger doesn’t require a lot of ingredients.  You only need a handful of seasonings and some good ground beef.  The beef you use for burgers makes all the difference.

WHAT TYPE OF BEEF IS BEST FOR BURGERS?

A lot of my recipes call for lean ground beef.  Not this one!  The best beef for making hamburger patties is 80% lean and 20 % fat ground beef.  You really need the fat in the meat to make juicy flavorful burgers.

THE BEST HAMBURGER RECIPE


HOW TO MAKE A GREAT CHEESEBURGER.

This burger recipe makes awesome cheeseburgers!  Just add a slice of cheese to the top of each burger patty about 1 minute before they are ready to come off the grill.  This will give the cheese enough time to melt.  I highly recommend sliced provolone cheese on these.

WHAT SHOULD I SERVE WITH HAMBURGERS?
Broccoli Grape Pasta Salad
Tomato Cucumber Salad
Honey Vanilla Fruit Salad
WATCH THE STEP BY STEP RECIPE VIDEO FOR THE BEST CLASSIC BURGER BELOW.
The Best Classic Burger Recipe
The Best Classic Burger Recipe - Perfectly seasoned juicy homemade hamburgers.  This easy recipe only needs a few ingredients.
Watch The Recipe Video Here
Prep Time
10 minutes
Cook Time
8 minutes
Total Time
18 minutes
Servings: 4 burgersCalories: 558kcalAuthor: Amanda Finks  Print Recipe  Pin Recipe  Rate this Recipe
5 from 1 vote

Nutrition
Serving: 1patty | Calories: 558kcal | Carbohydrates: 23g | Protein: 33g | Fat: 35g | Saturated Fat: 13g | Cholesterol: 120mg | Sodium: 1533mg | Potassium: 556mg | Fiber: 1g | Sugar: 3g | Vitamin C: 1.1mg | Calcium: 110mg | Iron: 5mg
Course Dinner, EntreeCuisine AmericanKeyword burger recipe, hamburger recipe, how to make a hamburger
 Pin This Recipe
Follow Me On Pinterest!
Click Here To Follow @afinks

Check out all of my great ground beef recipes.

« The Best Moist Carrot Cake
The Best Homemade Tacos »
HI, I’M AMANDA FINKS –

I’m a Registered Dietitian trained in food science and recipe development.  It’s my mission to bring you the BEST recipes your whole family will love.  See more.

COMMENTS

Doug M says

May 2, 2019 at 3:43 PM

It sounds so simple but it sure does make a big difference! (I’m actually eating this recipe as I type this!) Good point about the 80/20 but I would add that ground CHUCK makes the best hamburgers. What I’m wondering is, if it’s okay to freese the other 3 patties (with the blended ingredients) since I only wanted one? Thanks Amanda 🙂

REPLY

Fiona Manoon says

May 7, 2019 at 1:18 AM

Looks Delicious. !!!!
I loved your presentation .
Great Work . Thanks for sharing .
Your post is amazing . Your have shared this amazing recipe quite nicely that it sounds so easy to make.
Thanks !!

REPLY

Reid Smith says

May 14, 2019 at 4:01 PM

At a minimum, 80/20 is the way to go. When I can find it, 70/30 is even better. As my butcher says, fat is flavor. Don’t scrimp on it. Pat Lafreida makes a brisket/short rib grind that is commercially available here in central Conn that is excellent.

REPLY
LEAVE A REPLY

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Recipe Rating

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.

FOLLOW
HI, I’M AMANDA FINKS –

I’m a Registered Dietitian Nutritionist living in the St. Louis, MO area. I’m an avid cook, travel nerd, & lover of good food! I’m trained in Food Science & recipe development.  It’s my mission to bring you the BEST recipes your whole family will love!  See More.

GET NEW RECIPES SENT DIRECTLY TO YOUR EMAIL INBOX
RECENT POSTS
THE BEST CLASSIC GREEN BEAN CASSEROLE
EASY ROTISSERIE BUFFALO CHICKEN DIP
THE BEST HOMEMADE TACOS
THE BEST CLASSIC BURGER
THE BEST MOIST CARROT CAKE
THE BEST CLASSIC SHEPHERD’S PIE

COPYRIGHT © 2019 THE WHOLESOME DISH · DISCLAIMER PRIVACY


Top Navigation
EXPLORE
Cooking Light
Profile Menu
Your Account
Login
HOME
RECIPES
Pretty "Parslied" Spaghetti
Pretty "Parslied" Spaghetti
Photo: Caitlin Bensel
Active Time
15 Mins
Total Time
25 Mins
Yield
Serves 4 (serving size: about 1 cup)
By COLU HENRY May 2017

Leftover flat-leaf parsley is likely lurking in your crisper. This unassuming herb has a bright, grassy personality that combined with cheese, garlic, and good olive oil hits all the right notes to make this dish sing. The beauty is in the simplicity of this recipe, but it’s a great canvas for layering on additional flavors and textures. Try lemon zest, toasted walnuts or almonds, sun-dried tomatoes in oil, or even sardines for a protein-packed dish.

You May Like
Four-Herb Green Goddess Dressing
Green Pea and Parsley Hummus
Cooking with Parsley
How to Make Tortellini with Snap Peas and Pesto
Ina Garten Has Forever Changed the Way I Freeze Bread
We Tried Nine Packaged Stuffings—and There Was One Clear Winner
Read More
Sign Up for our Newsletter
Join our newsletter for free recipes, healthy living inspiration, and special offers.
SIGN UP
Cooking Light
Magazines & More
Learn More
Cooking Light Diet
this link opens in a new tab
Customer Service
this link opens in a new tab
Advertise
Content Licensing
Sitemap
Connect
Follow Us



Subscribe to Our Newsletter
OTHER MEREDITH SITES

this link opens in a new tab
this link is to an external site that may or may not meet accessibility guidelines.

 SEARCH
MEALS & COOKING
MEALS & COOKING
RECIPES
MENUS
NUTRITION
DINNER IDEAS
DESSERTS
UNDER 30 MINUTES
COCKTAILS & DRINKS
COMFORT FOOD
FOOD NEWS
FOOD TRENDS
HOLIDAYS
HOLIDAYS
HALLOWEEN
THANKSGIVING
CHRISTMAS
HANUKKAH
VALENTINE'S DAY
EASTER
NEW YEAR'S EVE
CINCO DE MAYO
KITCHEN TIPS AND TOOLS
KITCHEN TIPS AND TOOLS
COOKWARE & GADGETS
COOKBOOKS
KITCHEN SECRETS
RESTAURANTS & CHEFS
RESTAURANTS AND CHEFS
BEST CHEFS IN THE WORLD
ENTERTAINING & PARTIES
ENTERTAINING & PARTIES
WINE GUIDE
DELISH SHOP
DELISH ESSENTIALS
DELISH JEWELRY
ALL VIDEOS
NEWSLETTER
FOLLOW
FACEBOOK
TWITTER
GOOGLE+
PINTEREST
INSTAGRAM
YOUTUBE
PRIVACY NOTICE
TERMS OF USE
DINNERS
THANKSGIVING
SLOW-COOKER
COOKBOOK
SHOP
NEWSLETTER
1
Bakeware You'll Love
2
Chocolate Mint Buttons
3
See Every Starbucks Frappuccino Around The World
4
Pumpkin Pie Wontons
5
Your New Fave Cookbook

Delish editors handpick every product we feature. We may earn money from the links on this page.

Triple Berry Smoothie
by MAKINZE GORE
NOV 15, 2018
PARKER FEIERBACH

A smoothie is so much more than blended fruit. It's an art with all of it's different elements blending perfectly together.  In case these 29 smoothies aren't enough, here is a guide to making the perfect smoothie. 

Pick your fruit.

We chose strawberries, blackberries, raspberries, and bananas to be our base, but any combo of fruit is great. Make a tropical smoothie of pineapple, mango, and banana or add blueberry and peach to switch it up a bit. Aim for about 3 cups of fruit. 

Fresh or frozen fruit?

For smoothies, frozen fruit is best. It blends up thicker than fresh and gives you a really cold smoothie to enjoy when done. If you don't have frozen fruit, freeze your fresh fruit for 30 minutes before blending or add about 1 cup of ice and blend until smooth! 

We use unsweetened greek yogurt in our smoothie, but peanut butter, almond butter, or vanilla yogurt are all great options.  Traditionally about 1/2 cup is ideal. If you prefer thinner smoothies, you can either lessen the amount of thickener or skip it all together.

Almond milk is great for the added nutty flavor, but coconut milk pairs well with a tropical smoothie. Whole milk or fruit juice also work well. 1 1/4 cup of liquid makes the perfect consistency. If you skipped the thickener, use less liquid as well. 

Add some spinach or kale for additional nutrition or flax seeds for omega-3s. Flavors like fresh mint, vanilla extract, cinnamon, or honey will take any smoothie to the next level. 

YIELDS:
2 SERVINGS
PREP TIME:
0 HOURS 5 MINS
TOTAL TIME:
0 HOURS 5 MINS

GET INGREDIENTS Powered by Chicory

Delish: Eat Like Every Day’s the Weekend
amazon.com
$30.00 $17.99 (40% off)
GET YOURS NOW!
MAKINZE GORE Food Assistant
Makinze is the Food Assistant for Delish.com.
MORE FROM
RECIPES
Apple Pie Baked Apples
Pumpkin Pie Cookies
Perfect Steak Pot Pie
69 Cheesecakes Better Than The Cheesecake Factory
79 Perfect Pasta Dinners That Couldn't Be Easier
The 45 Most Delish Macaroni And Cheese Recipes
Baked Alaska
Pumpkin Pie Wontons
Chocolate Mint Buttons
PB Fanatics Need This Nutter Butter Cheesecake
RECIPES

MEALS & COOKING

TRIPLE BERRY COBBLER

THIS MANGO SMOOTHIE WILL BECOME YOUR NEW GO-TO

HIT THE REFRESH BUTTON WITH THIS KETO SMOOTHIE

THIS BANANA SMOOTHIE IS THE PERFECT BREAKFAST

THIS WATERMELON SMOOTHIE IS SO REFRESHING

GREENS ON THE GO SMOOTHIE
Newsletter
About Us
Press Room
Contact Us
BestProducts
Community Guidelines
Advertise Online
A Part of Hearst Digital Media
Delish participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.
©2019 Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Privacy Notice Your California Privacy Rights Interest-Based Ads Terms of Use Site Map

ABOUT RECIPES BAKING TIPS

BREAD CAKES COOKIES CUPCAKES PIES BAKING TIPS RECIPES BY SEASON BY INGREDIENT
SEARCH
Master Scones Recipe
Posted on May 1, 2019 / posted in Scones / 336 comments
Twitter
Facebook
Pinterest
Yummly
Email
THIS POST MAY CONTAIN AFFILIATE SALES LINKS. PLEASE SEE MY FULL DISCLOSURE POLICY FOR DETAILS
Jump to Recipe

Using my perfected master scone recipe, build your own scones with a variety of add-ins like chocolate chips, berries, or cheese and herbs. These better-than-the-bakery treats are flaky, flavorful, and moist with crisp crumbly edges. There’s a lot of helpful information and step-by-step photos, but feel free to jump right to the recipe!

Scones are sweet or savory, perfect with coffee and tea, welcome at baby showers, bridal showers, brunch, snack time, bake sales, Mother’s Day, and wherever muffins or coffee are appropriate. (All the time!)

But depending on the recipe and technique, scones can be dry and sandpaper-y with flavor comparable to cardboard. They can also over-spread and taste pretty boring. However, boring isn’t in our scone vocabulary!! My basic scone recipe promises uniquely crisp and buttery scones with crumbly corners and a soft, flaky interior.

I have several scone recipes that begin with the same basic formula. Let’s review the fundamentals so you can learn how to make the best scones. Sit back because there’s a lot to cover in this post!

What are Scones?

Depending where you live, the term “scone” differs. English scones are more similar to American biscuits and they’re often topped with butter, jam, or clotted cream. American scones are different, but different isn’t necessarily a bad thing! Today’s scones are sweeter, heavier, and aren’t usually topped with butter because there’s so much butter IN them. Sweetness aside, there’s still room for vanilla icing or a dusting of confectioners’ sugar on top. By the way, here’s my favorite recipe for traditional scones.

Scones are leavened with baking powder, so making them is generally quick. Blueberry scones are my favorite variety, but that quickly switches to pumpkin scones in the fall months! (Here are all my scone recipes.)

No matter which flavor you choose, these scones are:

Moist & soft inside
Crumbly on the edges
Buttery & flaky
Not sandpapery
Video Tutorial: Scones

Let’s start with a video tutorial.

Only 7 Ingredients in this Basic Scone Recipe

You only need 7-9 ingredients for my master scone recipe. Each ingredient serves a very important purpose and I bet you have most of them on hand right now!

Flour: 2 cups of all-purpose flour is my standard amount, but set extra aside for the work surface and your hands.
Sugar: I stick with around 1/2 cup of sugar for this scone dough. Feel free to slightly decrease, but keep in mind that the scone flavor and texture will slightly change. Reduce to about 2 Tablespoons for savory flavors. Brown sugar works too. However, if using brown sugar, whisk it into the wet ingredients to get out all the lumps. For example, see my caramel apple scones.
Baking Powder: Adds lift.
Salt: Adds flavor.
Butter: Besides flour, butter is the main ingredient in scones. It’s responsible for flakiness, flavor, crisp edges, and rise.
Heavy Cream or Buttermilk: For the best tasting pastries, stick with a thick liquid such as heavy cream or buttermilk. I usually use heavy cream, but if you want a slightly tangy flavor, use buttermilk. Thinner liquids change the flavor and appearance. You’ll be headed down a one way street to dry, bland, and flat scones.
Egg: Adds flavor, lift, and structure.
Optional: Vanilla extract adds necessary flavor to sweet scones, but skip it if you’re making savory scones. Depending on the flavor, cinnamon is another go-to ingredient.

And don’t forget about the add-ins! Scroll down to see all my favorite scone flavors.

How to Make Scones from Scratch

3 Tricks for Perfect Scones

If you take away anything from this post, let these be it!

Heavy Cream or Buttermilk: Avoid thinner milks which yield a flatter, less flavorful scone. Canned coconut milk makes a wonderful nondairy option!
Frozen Grated Butter: See above!
Refrigerate Before Baking: Remember, cold dough is a successful dough. To avoid over-spreading, I recommend chilling the shaped scones for at least 15 minutes in the refrigerator before baking.

How to prevent flat scones: See #2 and #3.

How to Freeze Scones

I used to be totally against freezing scone dough. You see, the baking powder is initially activated once wet and if you hold off on baking, the scones won’t rise as much in the oven. However, the decrease in rise is so slight that it doesn’t make a noticeable difference. In fact, you can even shape this scone dough into wedges and refrigerate overnight before baking.

Freeze Before Baking: Freeze scone dough wedges on a plate or baking sheet for 1 hour. Once relatively frozen, you can layer them in a freezer-friendly bag or container. Bake from frozen, adding a few minutes to the bake time in the recipe below. Or thaw overnight, then bake as directed.
Freeze After Baking: Freeze the baked and cooled scones before topping with icing or confectioners’ sugar. I usually freeze in a freezer-friendly bag or container. To thaw, leave out on the counter for a few hours or overnight in the refrigerator. Warm in the microwave for 30 seconds or on a baking sheet in a 300°F (149°C) oven for 10 minutes.

15+ Scone Flavors
Blueberry Scones and Chocolate Chip Scones (both pictured)
Cranberry Orange and Pumpkin Scones
Banana Scones
Raspberry Almond Buttermilk Scones
Lemon Blueberry Scones and Sprinkle Scones
Caramel Apple and Cinnamon Chip Scones
Triple Chocolate Scones – they taste like brownies!
Strawberry Lemon Poppy Seed Scones
Mixed Berry (pictured): Follow recipe below and add fresh or frozen mixed berries. Raspberries and blackberries burst easily, so don’t go overboard on those.
Cherry Chocolate Chip: Follow recipe below and add 3/4 cup semi-sweet chocolate chips and 3/4 cup chopped fresh or frozen cherries.
Savory Herb: Reduce sugar to 2 Tablespoons, leave out vanilla extract, and add 2 minced garlic cloves, 3/4 teaspoon ground black pepper, 1/2 cup chopped herbs such as rosemary, parsley, and basil. Additionally, feel free to add 1 cup shredded cheese to the dough and top with sea salt before or after baking!
Ham, Cheddar, & Scallion: Reduce sugar to 2 Tablespoons, leave out vanilla extract, and add 1 cup cooked cubed ham, 1 cup shredded cheddar cheese, and a handful of chopped scallions. Top with sea salt before or after baking.

Using the master recipe below as a starting point, toss in your favorite add-ins like white chocolate chips, toasted pecans, sweetened or unsweetened coconut, dried cranberries, peanut butter chips, etc. If it’s a particularly wet add-in like chopped peaches, blot them with a paper towel before adding to the dough. Top with lemon curd or any of the suggested toppings below. Above all, have fun finding your favorite flavor!

How to Make Perfect Scones
★★★★★
4.9 from 155 reviews
 Prep Time: 30 minutes  Cook Time: 25 minutes  Total Time: 1 hour  Yield: 8 large or 16 small scones
PRINT
PIN
Description

Tag @sallysbakeblog on Instagram and hashtag it #sallysbakingaddiction

Related Recipes
Chocolate Chip Scones
Classic Pumpkin Scones
Funfetti Chip Scones
My Favorite Blueberry Scones
336 Comments
Rose says: October 30, 2019 at 10:03 pm

I loved making this recipe… especially adding the heavy cream on top of the scones to make them extra crumbly. I also added some cinnamon w the sugar. I made smaller scones … more to share w everyone. Next time I will make a double batch. This is something I will make over and over again. Thank you Sally for giving me the best recipe!!!!

★★★★★

Reply
Lisa says: November 3, 2019 at 7:43 am

This is the perfect scone recipe, it needs no tweaking.

★★★★★

Reply
Anne Divers says: November 6, 2019 at 8:38 am

I love this recipe so much because you explain how to make the perfect scones. The last time I tried to make scones, the dough wouldn’t come together. After reading your recipe, I am definitely going to try them again and hopefully perfect them!

Reply
Sally says: November 6, 2019 at 8:56 am

I’m so glad you found the post helpful, Anne!

Reply
« Previous 1 … 6 7 8
Leave a Reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Rate this recipe ☆ ☆ ☆ ☆ ☆

Comment

Name (required) Email (will not be published) (required) Website

Notify me via e-mail if anyone answers my comment.

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.

With kitchen-tested quality recipes and step-by-step tutorials, my goal is to give you the confidence to bake and cook from scratch.

Sally's Baking Challenge

Join the community on the 1st of every month as we tackle a new challenge recipe.

View More

Sally's Cookie Palooza

A tradition since 2013, every December we countdown to Christmas with 10 new cookie recipes in a row!

View More

Sally's Pie Week

The first week of every November is all about Thanksgiving Pies.

View More
My Cookbooks
About Sally

Welcome to my Kitchen!

I’m Sally, a cookbook author, photographer, and blogger. My goal is to give you the confidence and knowledge to cook and bake from scratch while providing quality recipes and plenty of pictures. Grab a cookie, take a seat, and have fun exploring! more about Sally

TOP RECIPES
Homemade Strawberry Cake Super Moist Chocolate Cupcakes Chewy Fudgy Homemade Brownies Lemon Blueberry Layer Cake Soft Chocolate Chip Cookies
SHOP
Sally’s Baking Addiction
Sally’s Candy Addiction
Sally’s Cookie Addiction
READ
Baking Tips
Blogging
FAQ
MORE
Contact
About
Home
FOLLOW ME

SEARCH

Copyright 2019 Sallys Baking Addiction. Web design by Southern Web

×
HOME
RECIPES
COOKBOOKS
BAKING TIPS
SALLY’S COOKIE PALOOZA
SALLY’S BAKING CHALLENGE
ABOUT
CONTACT


